This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information, please visit LibriVox.blogsom.com.
This reading by Megan Jane Daniels Suiyasu.
Frankenstein by Mary Shelley.
CHAPTER XIX
London was our present point of rest.
We determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city.
Clairvaux desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this time.
But this was with me a secondary object.
I was principally occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary
for the completion of my promise,
and quickly availed myself of the letters of introduction that I had brought with me,
addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers.
If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure.
But a blight had come over my existence,
and I only visited these people for the sake of the information they might give me
on the subject in which my interest was so terribly profound.
Company was irksome to me,
when alone I could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth.
The voice of Henry soothed me,
and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory peace.
But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to my heart.
I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow men.
This barrier was sealed with the blood of William and Justine,
and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish.
But in Clairvaux I saw the image of my former self.
He was inquisitive and anxious to gain experience and instruction.
The difference of manners which he observed
was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement.
He was also pursuing at an object he had long had in view.
His design was to visit India,
in the belief that he had in his knowledge of its various languages,
and in the views he had taken of its society,
the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonisation and trade.
In Britain only could he further the execution of his plan.
He was forever busy,
and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind.
I tried to conceal this as much as possible,
that I might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one
who is entering on a new scene of life,
undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection.
I often refused to accompany him,
alleging another engagement,
that I might remain alone.
I now also began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation,
and this was to me like the torture of single drops of water
continually falling on the head.
Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish,
and every word that I spoke in allusion to it
caused my lips to quiver and my heart to palpitate.
After passing some months in London,
we received a letter from a person in Scotland
who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva.
He mentioned the beauties of his native country
and asked us if those were not sufficient allurements
to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as Perth,
where he resided.
Clearville eagerly desired to accept this invitation,
and I, although I abhorred society,
wished to again view mountains and streams
and all the wondrous works
with which nature adorns her chosen dwelling places.
We had arrived in England at the beginning of October
and it was now February.
We accordingly determined to commence our journey
towards the north at the expiration of another month.
In this expedition,
we did not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh,
but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock and the Cumberland Lakes,
resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour
about the end of July.
I packed up my chemical instruments
and the materials I had collected,
resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook
in the northern highlands of Scotland.
We quitted London on the 27th of March
and remained a few days at Windsor,
rambling in its beautiful forest.
This was a new scene to us mountaineers.
The majestic oaks, the quantity of game
and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us.
From thence, we proceeded to Oxford.
As we entered this city,
our minds were filled with the remembrance of the events
that had been transacted there
more than a century and a half before.
It was here that Charles I had collected his forces.
This city had remained faithful to him
after the whole nation had forsaken his cause
to join the standard of parliament and liberty.
The memory of that unfortunate king and his companions,
the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring,
his queen and son,
gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city
which they might have supposed to have inhabited.
The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here
and we delighted to trace its footsteps.
If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification,
the appearance of the city had yet in itself
sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
The colleges are ancient and picturesque,
the streets are almost magnificent
and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it
through meadows of exquisite verdure,
is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters
which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers
and spires and domes embossed among aged trees.
I enjoyed this scene
and yet my enjoyment was embittered
both by the memory of the past
and the anticipation of the future.
I was formed for peaceful happiness.
During my youthful days,
disconsent never visited my mind
and if ever I was overcome by an anui,
the sight of what is beautiful in nature
or the study of what is excellent and sublime
in the productions of man
could always interest my heart
and communicate elasticity to my spirits.
But I am a blasted tree.
The bolt has entered my soul
and I felt then that I should survive
to exhibit what I shall soon cease to be.
A miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity,
pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.
We passed a considerable period at Oxford,
rambling amongst its environs
and endeavouring to identify every spot
which might relate to the most animating epoch
of the English history.
Our little voyages of discovery
were often prolonged by the successive objects
that presented themselves.
We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hamden
and the field on which that patriot fell.
For a moment, my soul was elevated
from its debasing and miserable fears
to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty
and self-sacrifice of which these sights
were the monuments and the remembrances.
For an instant, I dared to shake off my chains
and look around me with a free and lofty spirit,
but the iron had eaten into my flesh
and I sank again,
trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.
We left Oxford with regret and proceeded to Matlock,
which was our next place of rest.
The country in the neighbourhood of this village
resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of Switzerland,
but everything is on a lower scale
and the green hills want the crown of distant white alps,
which always attend on the piney mountains
of my native country.
We visited the wondrous cave
and the little cabinets of natural history
where the curiosities are disposed in the same manner
as in the collections at Servox and Chamonix.
The latter name made me tremble when pronounced by Henry
and I hastened to quit Matlock,
with which that terrible scene was thus associated.
From Derby, still journeying northwards,
we passed two months in Cumberland and Westmoreland.
I can now almost fancy myself amongst the Swiss mountains.
The little patches of snow,
which yet lingered on the northern sides of the mountains,
the lakes and the dashing of the rocking streams
were all familiar and dear sights to me.
Here also we made some acquaintances
who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness.
The delight of Clevel was proportionately greater than mine.
His mind expanded in the company of men of talent
and he found in his own nature greater capacities and resources
than he could have ever imagined himself to have possessed
while he associated with his inferiors.
I could pass my life here, he said to me,
and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.
But he found that a traveller's life
is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments.
His feelings are forever on the stretch
and when he begins to sink in to repose
he finds himself obliged to quit
that on which he rests in pleasure for something new
which again engages his attention
and which he also forsakes for other novelties.
We had scarcely visited the various lakes of Cumberland and Westmoreland
and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants
when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached
and we left them to travel on.
For my own part, I was not sorry.
I had now neglected my promise for some time
and I feared the effects of the demon's disappointment.
He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives.
This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment
from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace.
I waited for my letters with feverish impatience.
If they were delayed, I was miserable and overcome by a thousand fears
and when they arrived and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth and my father
I hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate.
Sometimes I thought that the fiend followed me
and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
When these thoughts possessed me
I would not quit Henry for a moment
but followed him as his shadow
to protect him from the fancied range of his destroyer.
I felt as if I had committed some great crime
the consciousness of which haunted me.
I was guiltless but I had indeed drawn down some horrible curse upon my head
as mortal as that of crime.
I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind
and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being.
Clairvaux did not like it so well as Oxford
for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh
its romantic castle and its environs
the most delightful in the world Arthur's Seat, Sir Barnard's Whirl
and the Pentland Hills compensated him for the change
and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration.
But I was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
We left Edinburgh in a week
passing through Coupar, St Andrews and along the banks of the Tay to Perth
where our friend greeted us.
But I was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers
or enter into their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest
and accordingly I told Clairvaux that I wished to make the tour of Scotland alone.
Do you, said I, enjoy yourself and let this be our rendezvous.
I may be absent a month or two
but do not interfere with my emotions, I entreat you.
Leave me to peace and solitude for a short time
and when I return I hope it will be with a lighter heart
more congenial to your own temper.
Henry wished to dissuade me
but seeing me bend on this plan ceased to remonstrate.
He entreated me to write often.
I had rather be with you, he said,
in your solitary rambles than with these Scotch people whom I do not know.
Hasten then, dear friend, to return
that I may again feel myself somewhat at home
which I cannot do in your absence.
Having parted from my friend
I determined to visit some remote spot of Scotland
and finish my work in solitude.
I did not doubt but that the monster followed me
and would discover himself to me when I should have finished
that he might receive his companion.
With this resolution I traversed the Northern Highlands
and fixed on one of the remotest of the Orkneys as the scene of my labours.
It was a place fitted for such a work
being hardly more than a rock whose sides were continually beaten upon by the waves.
The soil was barren
scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows
and oatmeal for its inhabitants
which consisted of five persons whose gaunt and scraggly limbs
gave tokens of their miserable fare.
Vegetables and bread when they indulged in such luxuries
and even fresh water was to be procured from the mainland
which was about five miles distant.
On the whole island there were but three miserable huts
and one of these was vacant when I arrived.
This I hired.
It contained but two rooms and these exhibited all the squalidness
of the most miserable pernery.
The thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered
and the door was off its hinges.
I ordered it to be repaired, bought for some furniture
and took possession.
An incident which would doubtless have occasioned some surprise
had not all the senses of the cottagers been benumbed by want
and squalid poverty.
As it was I lived ungazed and unmolested
hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave
so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men.
In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour
but in the evening when the weather permitted
I walked on the stony beach of the sea to listen to the waves
as they roared and dashed at my feet.
It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene.
I thought of Switzerland.
It was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape.
Its hills are covered with vines
and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains.
Its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky
and when travelled by the winds
their tumult is but the play of a lively infant
when compared to the roaring of the giant ocean.
In this manner
I distributed my occupations when I first arrived
but as I proceeded in my labour
it became every day more horrible and irksome to me.
Sometimes I could not prevail on myself
to enter my laboratory for several days
and at other times I toiled day and night
in order to complete my work.
It was indeed a filthy process in which I was engaged.
During my first experiment
a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me
to the horror of my employment.
My mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour
and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings.
But now I went to it in cold blood
and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.
Thus situated
employed in the most detestable occupation
immersed in a solitude
where nothing could for an instant call my attention
from the actual scene in which I was engaged
my spirits became unequal.
I grew restless and nervous.
Every moment I feared to meet my persecutor.
Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground
fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object
which I so much dreaded to behold.
I feared to wander from the sight of my fellow creatures
lest when alone
he should come to claim his companion.
In the meantime I worked on
and my labour was already considerably advanced.
I looked towards its completion
with a tremulous and eager hope
which I dared not trust myself to question
but which was intermixed with obscure
forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken
in my bosom.